Add blog post of new-architecture (#33)
kubewarden/kubewarden.io: content/blog/2021/10/new-architecture-to-ease-kubewarden-administrators-lives.md

---
title: A new architecture to ease Kubewarden administrators' lives
authors:
    - Víctor Cuadrado Juan
date: 2021-10-01
---

We are pleased to announce a new architecture for the Kubewarden stack, in line
with its journey to maturity:

The introduction of a **PolicyServer** Custom Resource Definition which allows
users to describe a policy-server Deployment, together with binding
**ClusterAdmissionPolicies** to a specific **PolicyServer** instance.

These 2 changes are accompanied by a multitude of improvements to make Kubewarden
more comfortable for Kubernetes Administrators, such as validation for

> Kuberwarden Custom Resources, improvements in Helm Charts, and Status and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuberwarden Custom Resources, improvements in Helm Charts, Status and
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/c2429ef94810f7aaa7cee8ed97120415ef090969.

Conditions for **ClusterAdmissionPolicies**.

For a comprehensive list, see the [release notes](TODO) of our latest Helm
charts.

## How does it look like?

In previous versions, the Kubewarden Controller instantiated a single Deployment
of policy-server. That policy-server was configured via a ConfigMap, which

> contained the Deployment options (image, replicas, …), and a list of policies to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contained the Deployment options (image, replicas, ...), and a list of policies to
```

I always find it weird when using the unicode endpoint for ellipsis.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/c2429ef94810f7aaa7cee8ed97120415ef090969.

load compiled from the instantiated ClusterAdmissionPolicies, with information
on where to pull them from, their configuration options and so on.

> With the addition of the new **PolicyServer** Custom Resource, administrators
> have a better UX (just define the Custom Resources), can define more than 1
> policy-server Deployment, and get to select what ClusterAdmissionPolicies target
> which PolicyServers. Let's see a diagram of the new architecture:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the addition of the new **PolicyServer** Custom Resource, administrators have a better UX, since they can define as many policy servers as they need, and get to select what PolicyServer each ClusterAdmissionPolicy targets. Let's see a diagram of the new architecture:
```

Just an idea of a rephrase.

Author: Indeed, better :).
Fixed in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/c2429ef94810f7aaa7cee8ed97120415ef090969.

{{< figure class="center" src="/images/how-it-works-kubewarden.svg" width="90%" alt="new architecture diagram">}}

On the diagram, notice the 2 separate PolicyServer Deployments in cyan and mauve
(right), created as specified in the 2 PolicyServer resources (left).

> Each policy server loads different policies, specified in the
> ClusterAdmissionPolicies. The new PolicyServer Custom Resource is cluster-wide,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each policy server loads different policies -- all ClusterAdmissionPolicies that target that specific policy server. The new PolicyServer Custom Resource is cluster-wide,
```

I think is more clear to explicitly repeat that it's the ClusterAdmissionPolicy the resource targeting the PolicyServer.

Author: True, fixed in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/c2429ef94810f7aaa7cee8ed97120415ef090969.

which means that is identifiable by its unique `name`. Here is an example of a
PolicyServer named `tenant-a`:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1alpha2
kind: PolicyServer
metadata:
  name: tenant-a
spec:
  image: ghcr.io/kubewarden/policy-server:latest
  replicas: 1

> ```

Reviewer: Do you think it would be good to mention that every policy server accepts a service account too, that will be used by the deployment? If you think it's too much for the introductory post, it's good.

Author: Good idea, added in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/fe3faa37d1105e3cb847c9d79b24911697ec20be.

A ClusterAdmissionPolicy targeting that PolicyServer needs to set
`spec.policyServer` to `tenant-a`, as such:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1alpha2
kind: ClusterAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  name: psp-capabilities
spec:
  policyServer: tenant-a
  module: registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/psp-capabilities:v0.1.3
  rules:
    - apiGroups: [""]
      apiVersions: ["v1"]
      resources: ["pods"]
      operations:
        - CREATE
        - UPDATE
  mutating: true
  settings:
    allowed_capabilities:
      - CHOWN
    required_drop_capabilities:
      - NET_ADMIN
```

For a more in depth dive, have a look at our [architecture
docs](https://docs.kubewarden.io/architecture.html), and the [Kubewarden CRDs documentation](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-controller/blob/main/docs/crds/README.asciidoc).

## Ok, but what does this mean for administrators?

> Moving from 1 PolicyServer to several increases resiliency and segregation. Now,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving from one PolicyServer to several increases resiliency and segregation. Now,
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/c2429ef94810f7aaa7cee8ed97120415ef090969.

we can take admission reviews from policies and separate them into several
PolicyServers. While the old architecture was already HA, a noisy
tenant/namespace or a frequently used policy could bring to a crawl the only

> policy server and break havoc in the Cluster. With the new possibility of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
policy server and wreak havoc in the Cluster. With the new possibility of
```

Reviewer: I would make "WIth the new possibility..." a new paragraph.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/commit/6ffe134c9d260c2a44702f469e73f677a013c667.

several PolicyServers, a Kubernetes Operator can isolate policy evaluations per

> tenant/namespace, and run mission critical policies separately, making the whole

Reviewer: In general, they can isolate as they want literally, not specifically tenant/namespace, although it will be surely a very common pattern. I think we should somehow point out that how the given ClusterAdmissionPolicy targets specific PolicyServer (and namespaced AdmissionPolicy in the future), is completely up to the user, and how they want to split/organize is completely up to the cluster administrators.

Author: True. I reworded and added a couple of paragraphs making that distinction in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/fe3faa37d1105e3cb847c9d79b24911697ec20be.

infrastructure more resilient.

The new architecture also validates and mutates PolicyServers and
ClusterAdmissionPolicies with dedicated admission controllers, for a better UX.
Which means that administrators can rest comfortably when editing them, as
catastrophic outcomes (such as all policies being dropped by a misconfigured
PolicyServer, leading to DOS against the cluster) can never happen. Also,
ClusterAdmissionPolicies will, if no `spec.policyServer` is defined, bind to the
PolicyServer named `default`. In addition,
[Finalizers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/finalizers/)

> are now added to all Kubewarden CRs, which ensure orderly deletion by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are now added to all Kubewarden Custom Resources, which ensure orderly deletion by the
```

Author: Fixed.

Kubewarden Controller.

> The inclusion of validating and mutating webhooks for Kuberwarden CRDs means that

Reviewer: I'm split on whether we should use "Custom Resource Definition" instead of "CRD" in the blog post. I think is more readable, but I also understand that whoever is reading this (should probably?) know about the acronym...

Author: We can always say Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) and then use CRD onwards. It's just *so* verbose..

Author: Done so in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/7068889cfe285fef872928e69ebb3f471dd4e329.

the controller webhook server needs to be securely hooked up to the Kubernetes
API. In this case, it means using TLS certificates. We have chosen to integrate
Kuberwarden with [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/), to simplify the
installation, and our Helm Chart today comes with the option for automatically
creating and setting up Self-Signed certs, or using your own cert-manager
Issuer.

For ease of deployment, we have separated the CRDs into its own Helm chart:
`kubewarden-crds`. This prepares the stack for smoother upgrades in the future.
The Kubewarden Controller and default policy server stay in the
`kubewarden-controller` Helm chart.

All of the new changes simplify managing clusters. Which makes managing multiple

> clusters via Fleet more consistent and streamlined.

Reviewer: Managing clusters and managing multiple clusters are together here, I think we could rephrase this bit.

> clusters via Fleet more consistent and streamlined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
clusters via [Fleet](https://fleet.rancher.io/) more consistent and streamlined.
```

Author: Added, thanks!

## A hands-on example

Let's install Kubewarden and secure our cluster against privileged pods with a
simple policy.

### Installing Kubewarden

Make sure you have [`cert-manager`
installed](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/) and then install the

> `kubewarden-crds` and `kubewarden-controller` chart.

Reviewer: If we are explaining how to install cert-manager (like in the example that follows -- what I think is perfectly fine, so they only have to copy and paste), I think we can remove this sentence, because following the steps will be enough.

Author: I have dropped the phrase, as it is more or less repeated after the commands, too.

For example:
```console

> $ kubectl apply -f https://github.com/jetstack/cert-manager/releases/download/v1.5.3/cert-manager.yaml

Reviewer: We probably want to wait for cert-manager to be ready, and for its webhooks to be registered... I did this back in the time, but didn't try with a new deployment:

```
$ kubectl wait --for=condition=Available deployment --timeout=2m -n cert-manager --all
```

This way, we know that the `helm install` will work, because the CRD's of cert-manager will be properly registered and the webhooks it needs will be running.

$ helm repo add kubewarden https://charts.kubewarden.io
$ helm install --create-namespace -n kubewarden kubewarden-crds kubewarden/kubewarden-crds
$ helm install --wait -n kubewarden kubewarden-controller kubewarden/kubewarden-controller
```

This will install cert-manager, and then install the `kubewarden-crds` and
`kubewarden-controller` Helm charts on the Kubernetes cluster in the default

> configuration (which includes self-signed TLS certs). After ~1 minute, you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration (which includes self-signed TLS certs). Shortly after, you
```

Author: Fixed.

> will have the Kubewarden Controller running and 1 PolicyServer, named `default`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will have the Kubewarden Controller running and one PolicyServer, named `default`,
```

on the `kubewarden` namespace:

```console
$ kubectl get policyservers
NAME      AGE
default   38s
```

The default configuration values should be good enough for the majority of
deployments (all options are documented [here](https://charts.kubewarden.io/#configuration)).

> Now, you can use Kubewarden, with Go, Rust, Swift, Rego policies, as you are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you can use Kubewarden, with Go, Rust, Swift, Open Policy Agent and Gatekeeper policies, as you are
```

Author: Fixed.

used to.

Let's deploy our own policy-server named `my-policy-server`, and a Kubewarden
Policy based on the
[pod-privileged](https://github.com/kubewarden/pod-privileged-policy) policy, to
be scheduled in that specific policy-server:

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
---
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1alpha2
kind: ClusterAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  name: privileged-pods
spec:
  policyServer: my-policy-server
  module: registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:v0.1.9
  rules:
    - apiGroups: [""]
      apiVersions: ["v1"]
      resources: ["pods"]
      operations:
        - CREATE
        - UPDATE
  mutating: false
---
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1alpha2
kind: PolicyServer
metadata:
  name: my-policy-server
spec:
  image: ghcr.io/kubewarden/policy-server:v0.1.10
  replicas: 1
EOF
```

```console

> vic@viccuad2 ~/suse/kw/helm-charts/charts (new-architecture=)$ kubectl get policyservers

Reviewer: Replace the PS1 with `$` for simplicity

Author: Doh. Done, thanks.

NAME               AGE
default            1m12s
my-policy-server   29s
```

> Meanwhile the new Deployment for the new PolicyServer is not up, the policy will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the new Deployment for the new PolicyServer is still being deployed, the policy will
```

Author: Fixed.

```console
$ kubectl wait --for=condition=PolicyActive clusteradmissionpolicy/privileged-pods
clusteradmissionpolicy.policies.kubewarden.io/privileged-pods condition met

$ kubectl get clusteradmissionpolicies
NAME              POLICY SERVER      MUTATING   STATUS
privileged-pods   my-policy-server   false      active
```

Now if we try to create a Pod with at least one privileged container, it will
not be allowed:

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: privileged-pod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: nginx
      image: nginx:latest
      securityContext:
          privileged: true
EOF

Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "privileged-pods.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: User 'youruser:yourrole' cannot schedule privileged containers
```

# Foreword

The new Kubewarden stack, with the new cluster-wide PolicyServer resource,
allows fine-tuning of policies, and at the same time makes the life of
administrators easier with CR validations, workflow simplifications, and
separation of concerns.

We hope you enjoy Kubewarden. We have many ideas about how to expand and improve

> the project, and we would like you hear what you would like to see in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the project, and we would like to hear what you would like to see in the
```

Author: Fixed.

---
title: A new architecture to ease Kubewarden administrators' lives
authors:
    - Víctor Cuadrado Juan
date: 2021-10-01
---

We are pleased to announce a new architecture for the Kubewarden stack, in line
with its journey to maturity:

The introduction of a **PolicyServer** Custom Resource Definition which allows
users to describe a policy-server Deployment, together with binding
**ClusterAdmissionPolicies** to a specific **PolicyServer** instance.

These 2 changes are accompanied by a multitude of improvements to make Kubewarden
more comfortable for Kubernetes Administrators, such as validation for
Kuberwarden Custom Resources, improvements in Helm Charts, Status and
Conditions for **ClusterAdmissionPolicies**.

For a comprehensive list, see the [release notes](TODO) of our latest Helm
charts.

## How does it look like?

In previous versions, the Kubewarden Controller instantiated a single Deployment
of policy-server. That policy-server was configured via a ConfigMap, which

> contained the Deployment options (image, replicas, ...), and a list of policies to
> load compiled from the instantiated ClusterAdmissionPolicies, with information

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
contained the Deployment options (image, replicas, ...), and a list of policies to be loaded, with information
```
`list of policies to load compiled from the instantiated ClusterAdmissionPolicies` is not very clear to me

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/fe3faa37d1105e3cb847c9d79b24911697ec20be.

## Ok, but what does this mean for administrators?

Moving from 1 PolicyServer to several increases resiliency and segregation. Now,
we can take admission reviews from policies and separate them into several
PolicyServers. While the old architecture was already HA, a noisy
tenant/namespace or a frequently used policy could bring to a crawl the only
policy server and break havoc in the Cluster.

With the new possibility of several PolicyServers, a Kubernetes Operator can
isolate policy evaluations per tenant/namespace, and run mission critical
policies separately, making the whole infrastructure more resilient.

The new architecture also validates and mutates PolicyServers and
ClusterAdmissionPolicies with dedicated admission controllers, for a better UX.
Which means that administrators can rest comfortably when editing them, as
catastrophic outcomes (such as all policies being dropped by a misconfigured
PolicyServer, leading to DOS against the cluster) can never happen. Also,
ClusterAdmissionPolicies will, if no `spec.policyServer` is defined, bind to the

> PolicyServer named `default`. In addition,

Reviewer 3: maybe we can mention 'default' is created by kubewarden when you install it?

Author: Done in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/fe3faa37d1105e3cb847c9d79b24911697ec20be! On the hands-on example, we also mention it, but I think its good to mention it here too.

options and so on.

With the addition of the new **PolicyServer** Custom Resource, administrators
have a better UX, since they can define as many policy servers as they need, and
get to select what PolicyServer each ClusterAdmissionPolicy targets. Let's see a
diagram of the new architecture:

{{< figure class="center" src="/images/how-it-works-kubewarden.svg" width="90%" alt="new architecture diagram">}}

On the diagram, notice the 2 separate PolicyServer Deployments in cyan and mauve
(right), created as specified in the 2 PolicyServer resources (left).

Each policy server loads different policies -- all ClusterAdmissionPolicies that
target that specific policy server. The new PolicyServer Custom Resource is
cluster-wide, which means that is identifiable by its unique `name`. Here is an
example of a PolicyServer named `tenant-a`:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1alpha2
kind: PolicyServer
metadata:
  name: tenant-a
spec:
  image: ghcr.io/kubewarden/policy-server:v0.1.10
  replicas: 1
```

The PolicyServer Custom Resource also accepts an optional
`spec.serviceAccountName` to be associated with (if not set, as here, the

> Namespace ServiceAccount will be used).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Namespace default ServiceAccount will be used).
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden.io/pull/33/commits/48ba5b1913d909022e7e42df9b1894fc5166a813.
